We have some exercises here.
So if you've checked out the repo,
you can open up exercises/1/formatter.js.
There's a couple of different
files in that folder.
I'm gonna go through what
they all do in a sec.
But the format is the one where
we're gonna make our changes.
So basically, there's comments that have
a little arrow finger pointing to them,
and what we're gonna do is
do what those comments say.
So let's hop on over here
to my trusty Zed editor.
I work at Zed, so shameless plug.
And also, I love it.
[LAUGH] But basically all of
the exercises have the same format.
So you've got index.js, and index.js
is essentially just a bunch of tests.
So it's like, hey,
does the const declaration
format the way we expect it to?
Great, looks good.
What if we have one of the type annotation
we're not actually gonna implement type
annotations in this, course, but
we are gonna talk about them, and so
the lexer and
the parser do support them, but
we don't go as far as to
actually implement them.
String literals like hello world,
they format, okay, etc., etc.
So there's a whole bunch of
tests in here but unfortunately,
the tests don't work right now.
Well, they don't all pass right now.
So if I do node, sorry,
I need a cd into their
firstm cd exercises/1, node index.js.
We actually get some test errors,
quite a few of them, actually.
Now I really wanted to make
this a zero dependency course,
you don't have to install anything.
So this is our little,
extremely fancy test runner.
It's test.js, it's one directory up.
But basically, it's just like, okay,
some of these are not
formatting things correctly.
Why are they not formatting correctly?
Because there's a giant
to do here in the output,
instead of what should actually be output.
So let's go take a look at that.
I'm just going to show you these files.
We're not actually gonna make any
changes them, but just so they're there.
This is the tokenization thing for
what we just talked about.
Basically, this is an actual
implementation of this.
Like I said, this is not a course
about parsing and tokenization.
So if you wanna take a look at this code,
you can feel free to do that, but
you don't really need to for what we're
talking about, same thing with parse.js.
So every single one of these examples that
we're gonna go through in the exercises
has a tokenizer and
a parse just cuz the compiler needs it.
But again, we're not really gonna spend
a lot of time looking through it.
It's just like, man,
if you're curious, it's cool.
Here's all the stuff.
We got constant, we got return,
it's what makes the tokens and
then later the parse tree.
Now we are gonna definitely spend
time with parse tree notes for sure.
And starting with right
here in the formatter.
So here we have our formatter, and if you
look at the top, we've got our very first
little finger pointing arrow icon
that basically says okay, Rod,
run node index.js from the parent
directory to see which tests are failing.
We already did that, but if you wanna do
that locally, there's the command and
the instructions for how to do that.
Then basically it's like, fix the failing
tests by resolving the comments for
this down in the file.
So if you scroll down,
you can see there's a bunch of stuff
that is actually correct and working.
And there's a bunch of logic around,
I mentioned big switch statement, right?
It's like doing LOL.
We got a block, we got a string literal,
numeric literal,
you don't need to know
how all this code works.
Mostly, the point of these exercise
is we actually do want it to work.
So you can actually fix it and
watch the test pass.
So again, if you wanna sorta poke
around and see what this is doing,
I would not claim this is like production
grade compiler code [LAUGH] but
it is at least functioning well enough
that we can see what it's doing.
Okay, so
once we get down to the array literals,
this is where we've got the problems.
So basically,
what we wanna do is we want to resolve
all of these little finger emoji icon.
So there's one here for
format array literal.
This is right below
a format return statement.
Then there's another one for
format call expression.
So this is when you're calling a function.
And then finally,
we have a format binary expression.
That was last one, right?
Yeah, format binary expression.
So binary expression is essentially where
you have, in our case, it's just + or *.
Most languages have more than just plus or
times, but that's all we've got.
But the important part here is
that in each of these examples,
I've given you sort of the structure
of this node argument.
So you can just see, okay, node, the this
argument you've got right here is going to
have an array of elements, and each of
those elements is a parse tree node.
So what you wanna do in the exercise
is essentially end up with, instead of
returning this TODO string, you wanna
return a string that looks like this.
Based on iterating over these
elements that you've got in there,
each of which is one of these parse nodes.
Same thing kinda here, this same basic
idea except instead of an array,
now you've got a call expression.
So this has actually two different fields
on its structure, so one is callee.
Callee basically refers to
the function that you are calling.
Note by the way that, I mean, typically we
think about this as like, foo(arg1, arg2).
But one of the many edge cases
that comes up in compilers,
which we're actually our compiler is
not gonna bother implementing, but
we are gonna format it in case
someone writes it that way.
Well, actually, let me put it to you,
can anyone think of another way that you
can call a function that's not
involving putting a name here?
>> Student 1: Lambda functions?
>> Richard Feldman: Yeah,
exactly, lambda functions.
So you can do a is whatever, and
then immediately call it, right?
So that's why callee is a parse tree node
and not just a name, cuz it could be.
This whole thing right here could
be this gigantic expression,
and that has to be supported.
So this is something that definitely
comes up in production grade compilers.
So the callee is a parse tree node.
It's not just a name,
but it might be a name.
But we have to treat it as
though it might be anything.
And then of course,
you have the arguments that are coming in.
And so basically, unlike the array example
from earlier, we actually need to do
a traversal of the arguments, but
then also deal with the callee separately.
And then finally,
we have the binary expression,
which is basically just operator,
like plus or times.
And then there's the left, which is
basically the thing that comes before
the operator, and that's gonna be
a parse tree node, and then right,
which is another parse tree node that's
on the other side of the operator.
And then there's the operator name itself,
which is just gonna be a string,
like cluster or time.
Something like that.
>> Richard Feldman: Cool,
let's go through the solutions.
All right, so
first we had our format array literal.
By the way,
there is a solutions directory.
If you are totally stuck and
just wanna take a peek, you can.
But it's definitely better for
learning if you don't.
[LAUGH] So I'll use it to go
through the solutions, but
only use if absolutely necessary, or later
on if you wanna go see how it worked.
All right, so we're gonna skip over
this sort of edge case here first and
come back to that in a sec.
The main sort of bread and
butter here is, you got, okay,
I want to take my node node.elements,
you may recall from this thing,
this right here,
it's an array of parse tree nodes.
And just map over it, and
then for each element,
we wanna call formatNode on element.
So formatNode, if you poked
around in the source code file,
this is sort of the generic
I've got a node, and
then I want to turn it into the source
code format, an actual string.
And one of the things that formatNode
does is in its gigantic switch statement,
is actually calls our array literal here.
So we are actually doing something
recursive here potentially.
If we format an array literal inside
array literal, we go in here.
In the middle elements.map we call
formatNode, formatNode comes back
down here, and then how many times we have
nested arrays that'll just keep running.
After you got done with that,
then we're just doing a join with a comma.
Did anyone try to get fancy and make it so
that it did the multi-line thing
that we talked about earlier?
I wouldn't either for
ten minute exercise, but you could.
If you wanted to get fancy with it,
this is exactly where you would do that.
And then do the thing where you record in
the parse tree node, and then you have to
escape the formatter, and go back into
the parser to actually write that down.
But then at that point, you could just
look right here, sorry, at this node,
this one right here, and
just say if node.isMultiline or
something, has trailing comma,
then you could just branch right here.
And instead of doing this, you would do
an indentation and join on new line, and
stuff like that.
Cool, and then, of course,
we have the edge case,
which is that if the length is zero, then
you don't want to actually put spaces in
the middle of in the case of an object or
something like that.
Now, in this particular case, if you
didn't do this, nothing bad would happen.
But there are quite a lot of
scenarios where that does matter,
records or objects being the main example.
So usually, the way that formatters will
do those is something more like this.
But of course, you don't want your
empty object to look like that.
So that's where that edge case comes up.
In this case, it's more of a just habit
of putting the edge case in slash,
maybe a performance optimization,
although in this case, not really.
You're just saving yourself
a string interpolation.
But yeah, the main bread and
butter is just this.
So for our purposes, we can just copy this
over and demonstrate that'll just work.
Okay, so
now we should be down one of these arrows.
So here we had all these tests failed, and
now a slightly shorter
list of tests failed.
Hooray, we're making progress.
Any questions about that one before
we move on to the other two?
All right, so
next one is the call expression.
So we have the callee, which is a parse
tree node as previously mentioned,
not an identifier.
Then we have the actual arguments, which
is what we're gonna need to iterate over,
just like we did with the array.
So here's what that can look like.
So, first thing we do is we call
formatNode once again on the callee, and
that'll get us back a formatted
string that we can just later on,
using string interpretation,
so this interpolation.
So this will be either foo,
if it's the name of the function,
if it's an identifier node, or
it could be something really fancy,
with parentheses around it.
Either way, this is just gonna work.
Worth noting that if this
were a production compiler,
this is the part where you would probably
need some logic to try to answer
the question,
do I need to insert parentheses here?
Because this parse tree node might not,
depending on how you're representing
things, might not record whether or
not it had parentheses around it.
And if you've discarded those parentheses,
you might need to
strategically reinsert them.
So you wouldn't wanna put these
if it's an identifier, like foo,
then it would be really weird if you had.
I mean, it could work, but nobody
wants their code formatted like this.
But if it's something like,
it's (x => x + 1) or
something like that,
then you need the parentheses.
Because otherwise, if I don't have the
parentheses there, then it's gonna break.
Now I'm trying to call 1 as a function.
So this is another good example of where
these are the types of edge cases that
we're not gonna bother handling in our
compiler, but I am gonna call some of them
out along the way, just so
you can be aware of them, yeah.
>> Student 2: As a design decision here,
are we guarding upstream for null inputs?
So if I just call
the function without inputs,
will it give me something if I click
Python where it gives you the object, or
do we throw an error-
>> Richard Feldman: I see, so basically,
question is like, so
if I don't pass in any arguments,
what happens in this compiler?
This compiler accepts that.
We actually have first class support for
zero argument, like function calling.
So this can just be an empty
array when it comes in but yeah,
different languages like handle
those scenarios differently.
But yeah, in general,
with the one exception, arguably,
of generics,
we are gonna go through generics,
aka parametric polymorphism,
in our type checker.
But that's basically mainly because if
you're doing Hindley motor type inference,
it's either free or necessary anyway,
depending on how you look at it.
So it's not that fancy if you're
doing a Hindley motor type checker.
But other than that, in general,
if you're wondering,
are we gonna do this fancy thing?
Probably the answer is no.
[LAUGH] It's gonna be a very,
very un fancy subset of JavaScript
we're compiling to here.
All right, so in this case,
there is no optional initial edge
case that we might or might not do.
This is just all necessary.
This part is basically identical to
what we did in the previous one,
so with the one exception of
the extra formatNode there.
So let's run that again and,
hey, even fewer tests failed and
I think one fewer, great.
And finally,
we have the format a binary expression.
So here we have three fields
that we're dealing with.
So left operator and right.
Now, I'll show you an example of how we
could implement this incorrectly, but it's
pretty obvious, pretty much right away how
this is incorrect if you do it this way.
So format the thing that's
to the left of the operator,
format the thing that's
right to the operator.
If I were to just say left and right,
well, I'm missing something pretty
important for an operator,
which is the actual operator.
So if I run this, I did not make
any tests pass because although
we don't need to format the operator.
So if I try to do this,
I will get a different error.
Operator = formatNode(node.operator);.
Now, the operator is not a node.
This is actually just a string.
So if I try to do this, yeah,
at times still have a failure.
I'm not gonna scroll up and
find what the exact error was.
But the point is, this one,
we want to not formatNode.
This one just is a string.
So what we actually want is just that and
hooray, now all of our tests pass.
For extra credit, you can turn it
into a transpiler, just kidding.
But if you want to, you could, actually,
after the workshop [LAUGH] go do the thing
we talked about,
add some piece of syntax sugar,
but that requires changing the parser and
stuff, so.
Are you afraid of blowing
the stack with recursion?
[LAUGH] Are you afraid of blowing
Yeah, right.
So this is where formatNode is potentially
calling from an array literal, etc.
I mentioned this is recursive.
It's a very good question.
So blowing the stack would basically
mean what if this recurses so
many times that you run out of stack
space and then your compiler crashes?
That can't happen.
That's a real thing.
I have definitely used production grade,
very fancy,
millions of dollars have gone into
them compilers where I managed to,
in some cases, on purpose cuz someone
didn't believe me that I could induce one.
But also, in one case accidentally,
gotten a stack overflow from the compiler.
And so if you want to,
it is possible to avoid this happening.
The trade off is that it makes
your code a lot more complicated.
So basically, if you want to
make your compiler stack safe,
where you're not worrying about blowing
the stack, what you do is you essentially
simulate the stack where you
basically make an array, for example.
And instead of calling the function
recursively, you have it in a big loop,
and you just are pushing
things onto the stack.
and then when you finish your operation,
you pop them off the stack
just like functions do,
just like much worse ergonomically, and
then the trade off being that although
the ergonomics are worse now, you don't
have to worry about blowing the stack.
So, am I worried about it?
Not for this example, certainly.
[LAUGH] But I am actually worried about
it on production grade rock compiler.
And that is actually something I do
try to use the less ergonomic, but
stack save option.
But I think I'm kind of
in the minority on that.
I think most compiler authors would
just be like, just for courage.
Nobody's gonna write something
that has that much depth, anyway.
If they write a gazillion nested array
literals, they get what's coming to them.
But I don't know, so I guess I am
unusually worried about that, but
most compiler authors aren't.
Great question.
Any other questions before we
dive into name resolution?
I'm curious, do you know if any
languages that implement that kind of
protection against the stack blowing up,
so to speak?
Go comes to mind.
So the question was,
do you know of any languages that protect
against that sort of stack blowing up?
So there's trade offs here too.
So Go has this thing, I know it was
originally called segmented stacks, and
I think I read about them moving
to a different approach, but
I'm not sure if it's still
called segmented stacks or not,
or even if they did move
to a different approach.
But basically, without going out a huge
rabbit hole about [LAUGH] stacks.
The basic idea is that if you want,
you can make it so
that every single function that
when you're in the code gen phase,
when you code gen your functions,
you can insert a little bit of code at
the beginning and a little bit of code
at the end that basically says, okay,
I know exactly how much stack
space I'm going to use.
I know how many variables I have,
what's the maximum amount
of stack space I can use?
And before I start running my actual
function body, I'm just gonna check and
see if we got enough.
And if we don't have enough, and
you track that with these are all
your uses of stack space.
And if we don't have enough,
I'm gonna do this magical actually
allocate some new memory on the heap, and
I'm gonna move all my stuff over to
that and start running over there.
Now this does mean that
you can effectively guard
against your stack ever
running out of stack space.
It also means that if you recurs
indefinitely, you're just gonna run out of
heat memory instead, which is less
likely to happen but even scarier.
[LAUGH] Because you run
out of stack memory,
the consequences are much less severe
than running out of heat memory.
Plus it's probably gonna take a long
time to run out of heat memory, so
it's gonna be the symptom will be, your
program hangs for a long time and then
super blows up, whereas a stack overflow
happens, it gets resolved much faster.
So, trade-offs.
[LAUGH]